Speaker0: Humans spent the twentieth century making nature do what we wanted. In the twenty first, we're now trying to undo the damage. Decades into the push to fix Florida's Everglades, it's still a tug of war between money, power, and climate. Listen to WLRN's Bright Lit Place from NPR.

Speaker1: From NPR, this is Invisibilia. I'm Yohei Shaw. Welcome to The Goodbye Show. And, you know, it's it's not like we want to say goodbye. NPR is stopping production of invisibilia because of a massive budget shortfall. But that's the thing about goodbyes. They are often forced upon you, Sometimes rudely. And they're just hard. So our team is saying our goodbyes by doing what invisibilia does best, thinking hard about them. And we reached out to you, our listeners, for help.

Speaker2: Hey there.

Speaker3: Hello, Invisibilia. You asked about goodbyes,

Speaker1: and you did not disappoint.

Speaker4: I am currently in the middle of saying by

Speaker5: My goodbye is one that everybody saw coming.

Speaker2: Trouble letting things go.

Speaker3: I've never let goodbyes, but who does, really? Right?

Speaker1: We heard an objection to using the word goodbye in general.

Speaker3: On treaty seven territory where I reside, the Blackfoot people do not say goodbye, but instead, Which means see you later because goodbye is reserved for death.

Speaker1: Speaking of death, there was a lot of death In our inbox, dying family members, dying friends, dying pets.

Speaker6: I'm in the process of saying goodbye to my Nineteen year old cat, pincher.

Speaker7: Sorry. There

Speaker1: was a goodbye to a bad job

Speaker8: Felt like a toxic relationship.

Speaker1: To romantic relationships.

Speaker9: We had some wins. We had some losses. The season is now over, and that's okay.

Speaker1: Also a goodbye to a breast implant that went bad. I put the breast implant in a display Case jar thing. And surprisingly for NPR, we only got one haiku.

Speaker10: Buy for now, But not forever. Wait, see, listen.

Speaker1: Then there's the listener who did a very invisibility thing and said goodbye to her childhood home by recording her favorite sounds of it. Like the way the stairs would creak walking up them, the closing of her bedroom door, Or something as small as a light switch. Likes to switch quick. Got a lot of gusto. The light, however, was always a bit delayed and then eventually stopped working entirely. But the switch, it was a good switch. So today on the show, before NPR turns the lights off on us, We've got stories from the team and from you, our listeners, all meditations on navigating these tricky moments of departure. But first, a message from my cohost, Kia.

Speaker11: Okay. Let's get some that sound of foxes.

Speaker1: Kia's packing up to move right now, but she wanted to say goodbye.

Speaker11: This is just a little note to say thank you To everyone, I have a really deep gratitude to, firstly, you, the listener, for tuning in, for writing us for tweeting, for sending messages, just really engaging with the stuff that we make and letting us know that we like it and appreciate it. I'm so grateful for that. I'm I'm grateful for all the many, many people who have worked and helped make this show, including my cohost, Yohei Shaw, who helped usher in this new era of invisibility. Thank you to the people who first made this show, Elise and Lulu and Hannah. And, yeah, I'm just over here packing boxes. Endings can be hard, but they can also be opportunities. And so that's how I'm taking it. I'm taking this ending as an opportunity for a completely new and different beginning, and I'm looking forward to it. Keep in touch. Don't be a stranger. You can find me on the internets. Just search Kia Myakonatisse or Myakonatisse. You'll find me on some adventure Near the

Speaker10: water.

Speaker7: Of course, Kia. You'll be

Speaker1: by the water. Thank you for helping me spearhead this new era of invisibility. I'm so excited to hear where this new adventure takes you. Okay. Our first story comes to us from producer Andrew Mambo. Hey, Andrew. Welcome to The Goodbye Show.

Speaker2: Hey, Owe. I come bearing gifts.

Speaker1: Oh, okay. I love a gift.

Speaker2: I got fun stories. I went through the listener emails. And during this Time, what I really needed was some levity, some laughs. Mhmm. So I kind of found myself diving into this particular subset of funny stories about goodbyes, which was the awkward goodbyes.

Speaker1: There is something so delicious about the awkward goodbye as long as you are not the person responsible

Speaker2: for

Speaker1: it. For everybody else involved, it's it's truly a gift.

Speaker2: Oh, yeah. They're they're the best. That's why I wanna share with you a few of my favorite awkward goodbyes from listeners. You ready?

Speaker1: Yeah. Let's do it.

Speaker2: Okay. So we heard from one listener who the morning after a cute guy stayed over, she had to poop.

Speaker1: Uh-huh.

Speaker2: And, you know, she's trying to be polite, but also, you know, like, trying to get the guy out the door.

Speaker1: Makes sense.

Speaker2: Yeah. And he's just kinda not getting the hint. He's lingering, taking his sweet time. In the end, she finally ends up just yelling at him to go.

Speaker1: They're just like me in meetings that go long and I have to pee, but, like, I can't yell because we are in a workplace, so I just start bouncing on my bouncing ball chair.

Speaker10: I don't

Speaker1: know if you've noticed.

Speaker2: Of yeah. I've noticed. You do that immediately sometimes.

Speaker1: Well, that's what's happening. I'm doing a silent version of a yell via bounce.

Speaker2: Okay. Good to know. I'll make a note of that for this last week. Yeah. Alright. So another story we got was from a listener that took place in high school, and, you know, that's already an Awkward time.

Speaker1: Mhmm.

Speaker2: And one day their dad tells them, hey. We're gonna be moving away at the end of the school year. So this person's kinda devastated. They're leaving all their friends. They decide they're gonna make the perfect goodbye, and they spend months making a stop motion animated film that they play on the last day of school. It's the perfect goodbye. All the friends are, like, emotional. And then over the summer, the day comes back and says, hey. Actually, we're not moving. You're going back to school. And so they start the school year, and all her friends and everybody in the school keeps being like, didn't you leave? Why are you still here?

Speaker1: Oh my god. That is a nightmare. This person was just trying to get an a and saying goodbye, like, doing it in the most thoughtful, Nice way ever. Right? They're probably still processing that one.

Speaker2: Yeah. Super awkward. Okay. This last story is, like, next level. It's just straight slapstick awkward. This happened, like, fifteen years ago. This listener, Megan Sheehan, She was living in San Francisco at the time. Her friend Michael came to town. They were close friends in high school and had actually hooked up a little, and they kept in touch over the years. So when he comes to town, he invites her out to brunch with his current boyfriend and a group of friends. She's like, yes. Of course. I'd love to see you and meet your new boyfriend. But she's a little nervous because it's been a long time, and she wants to make a good impression. So, you know, she takes a little extra time getting ready.

Speaker12: Mhmm. I'm sure it took me, you know, an hour or two to get ready.

Speaker2: But almost immediately, things kinda start going left. Like, back then, Meghan was a punctual person. So she gets there. She's trying to be early, But when she arrives, she sees that everybody's already seated.

Speaker1: Mhmm. So she's, like, thrown off her game from the jump.

Speaker2: Right. Exactly. And then they order

Speaker12: Pancakes with bacon on the side. Like, bring the syrup. Like, give me as much sugar as you can. You know?

Speaker2: And the rest of the tables ordering salads and grain bowls.

Speaker1: What kind of brunch is that? Why are you paying for brunch if you're only gonna get salad?

Speaker2: I'm with you. Yeah. I do think the salad people are coming for you. But, so she tries to chat with a friend's boyfriend, But, like, they have nothing in common, so the conversation isn't going so great. It's just kinda flat.

Speaker12: His body language was sort of, like, turned Towards his friends, definitely felt like he just wasn't really interested in chatting. Poor Megan.

Speaker2: Yeah. I know. So the table gets cleared and brunch is coming to an end. She's like, you know, this has not been great. It's probably just gonna leave. And she decides to stop by the bathroom. And as she's coming back from the bathroom, she sees Michael's boyfriend, you know, who she had been having difficulty connecting with. She decides to Stop and say, hey. It was really nice meeting you, and then she doesn't really have anything else to say after that.

Speaker10: Uh-huh.

Speaker2: So she's kinda just standing there awkwardly.

Speaker12: And so I sort of step closer to him and, like, Just sort of press my my body up against his body, like, giving a hug, but Without my arms,

Speaker1: so awkward. Wait. Wait. Wait. So why didn't she use her arms?

Speaker2: She cannot Tell you why. She does not know.

Speaker12: I just I think I sort of froze. Like, I was thinking, well, he's taller than me, so he's gonna kind of, you know, Envelop me a little bit with his arms, but he he wasn't going in for the hug. He was just standing there.

Speaker2: So he doesn't give her anything. He doesn't help the situation at all.

Speaker12: So I'm giving him a full body press, You know, with the front of my body against the front of his body with no arms.

Speaker2: If he moved out of the way, she would have fallen down. Like, look at that.

Speaker12: Okay. And then I kinda stepped back, and I realized what just happened, and he looked so confused.

Speaker2: So eventually, she's like, oh god. What have I done? And decides to just leave and not, like, say goodbye to anybody. She just runs out of the restaurants.

Speaker1: Wow.

Speaker2: She doesn't say goodbye to her friend, Michael. They don't even talk about it, the rest of his trip that and she continued their friendship. You know? They're still in in contact. They've never talked about this happening.

Speaker1: They've never talked about it happening

Speaker2: She has never talked about it. I was like, you're gonna send them the story? She's like, yeah. I think so. Like, that's gonna be her way of talking about it. So awkward.

Speaker1: It would be so much less awkward if Meghan had just talked to him about it years ago.

Speaker2: Oh, yeah. For sure. I mean, like, That's the beauty of awkwardness is that it becomes more awkward because you don't talk about it. Uh-huh. Like, it's just a gift, and you need to just take it and embrace it and hold it tight.

Speaker1: Well, I I feel for Meghan and all of these listeners because I am also awkward at goodbyes. You know, like, there's always a moment where somebody has to initiate the goodbye. Like, this is over now, and we are moving on with our lives. And I just don't like being that person. And so there's, like, that awkward dance of, like, who's gonna do the goodbye who's gonna initiate? You know what I mean?

Speaker2: You don't wanna take responsibility for the being the one to start the goodbye?

Speaker1: Absolutely not. I just let the other person carry that burden.

Speaker2: Well

Speaker1: Okay. Well.

Speaker2: Is that is that it feels like is that happening now?

Speaker1: Like, don't you feel it? Someone needs to initiate the goodbye?

Speaker2: You have to do it.

Speaker1: Okay. Goodbye.

Speaker10: Okay.

Speaker1: After the break, the dead grandma club.

Speaker13: Support for this podcast and the following message come from Wise, the account that lets you manage your money internationally. With Wise, you can send, spend, and receive in over forty different currencies. You always get the mid market exchange rate with no markups or hidden fees. Simple. Download the Wyze app today. Support for this podcast and the following message come from Wyze, the account that lets you manage your money internationally. With Wyze, you can send, spend, and receive in over forty different currencies. You always get the mid market exchange rate with no markups or hidden fees. Simple. Download the Wyze app today.

Speaker14: It's time to stop hiding. It's time to be true to who you are. Go ahead. Let NPR become your entire personality. At the NPR online shop, we've got free shipping on all orders over ninety nine dollars. Totes, hats, T shirts, the works, only until December eighth. Live your truth at a discount at shop dot n p r dot org.

Speaker9: Paywalls limiting access to news aren't our style at NPR. We're on a mission to create a more informed public, and you can join us by giving today at m p PR dot org slash donate.

Speaker14: Who's the NPR superfan in your life? Is it your uncle, your sister, your dog walker? Could it be you? This holiday season, make a proud public media nerd even prouder with the piece of NPR swag from totes to decor to baseball caps and beyond, 'tis the season to shamelessly celebrate someone's NPR nerdery. Clear out your superfans wish list at shop dot n p r dot org.

Speaker15: The NPR network is supported by the communities we serve. That's you. In return, our journalism is available to everyone free of charge. Keep this public service strong. Give today at m p r dot org slash donate.

Speaker6: Hi, Ariana. Hi, Youwei. This is

Speaker4: the first time that we have tracked together, it is. And I wish

Speaker1: it were under better circumstances.

Speaker6: Me too. Me too.

Speaker1: But, Yes. Ariana Garrett Lee, you are a producer of Invisibilia. What do you got today?

Speaker6: So For me, the scary part about saying goodbye is not actually saying goodbye. It's the part that comes after. Like, am I gonna remember what I'm supposed to about this experience or this relationship? Which is why I've always been the type of person to hold on to stuff. Mhmm. For example, a few years ago, my grandma's passed away, And I'm obsessed with this amazing stuff they left me, like a rug from Iran that's in my living room, a portrait of my Chinese grandma that's on my wall. Maybe you've noticed this huge ring that I wear on my finger, Which I always wear even though it gets in the

Speaker1: way of cooking. I have noticed.

Speaker6: But in this callout, we got a story from a listener that actually made me question myself. Okay. The listener, her name is Molly Devnani. And last year, she lost her grandma who she adored.

Speaker7: I have this memory of her, like, throwing her walker forward and then walking to catch up with it. Just a busy, busy person.

Speaker1: Oh my god. How does that even work? That's like a it's like from a Pixar movie.

Speaker6: It's like, do you need the walker? I feel like

Speaker1: you don't need the walker.

Speaker6: So after she passed, Molly went to India where her grandma had lived. And while she was there, one of the things that was happening was that her family was cleaning up her grandma's house, deciding what to throw out, what to keep, and that's when they all came across a bag of nightgowns.

Speaker7: They feel pressed and a little humid maybe, and they're kind of stuck in their folded positions. One of them is yellow and has Pink flowers on it. Another one is green, like a bright fluorescent type of green. Just her swag. You know?

Speaker1: So Molly is,

Speaker6: like, absolutely entranced with these nightgowns while her aunt and cousin are also standing there I'm just, like, way less impressed.

Speaker7: And they were sort of joking around, smelling it, how it smells like coconut oil. They couldn't stand that she always had coconut oil smell on her. But I could kind of put together, oh my gosh. They're they're gonna get rid of these. And I just had this sinking feeling of, like, abs absolutely not. Like, no. I'm keeping these. These are mine. In the moment, they were like, okay, Molly. You don't know what's going on, but just just take them.

Speaker6: So she packs a bag full to the brim with the nightgowns. Did you have to pay for an extra bag?

Speaker7: I did. Yeah. I sure did.

Speaker6: She takes the long flight home, literally going back to America with your familial baggage.

Speaker7: Yeah. Quite literally. Yes.

Speaker6: She gets back to the US, and she has this plan. She wants to turn the nightgowns into a quilt. So she pops the nightgowns in the trunk of her car. She's gonna take them to her mom's house for help sewing. But before she can get that far,

Speaker7: I'd, off the cuff, just mentioned this to my cousin, and she's like, well, you know You know, you actually are supposed to, like, burn them or what we do is just give them away.

Speaker6: So Molly's Hindu, and her family does this thing where they get rid of stuff after someone passes away because they want the person's soul to be able to leave their body and move on, which they can't do if you have all their stuff around.

Speaker7: And I was kind of like, oh, shoot. You know? I'm I'm sorry. I didn't know that. Why didn't you tell me before I packed The bag of nighties, you know, home with me.

Speaker6: But, you know, considering the stakes, Molly's cousin is pretty chill about it.

Speaker7: She's like, but it's okay. It's, I mean, it's it's whatever you want. So it's more about what you believe in. So now it's kind of like, what do I believe in?

Speaker1: Oof. That is it would almost be easier if the cousin was just like, you need to burn them or it's totally fine.

Speaker6: I know. And that's why for weeks, Molly is like, what do I do? Do I make the quilt?

Speaker7: Oh my gosh. It would be beautiful. It would look so good on my couch.

Speaker6: Or do I take the nineties out of my car and donate

Speaker7: them? Like, what if her soul is still in there? What if what they said is true and, like, She's just in the trunk. Like, should I move her up to the passenger seat? Or

Speaker1: So what did Molly do? Well,

Speaker6: when I called Molly, she still hadn't decided, and we talked about it a lot. And eventually, she said this thing about keeping the nineties that I just couldn't get out of my head.

Speaker7: I can keep her handwritten notes around. I can keep her nightgowns around, but that's ultimately to try to sort of stage the scene as though she's here. Right?

Speaker10: Yeah.

Speaker7: I think we've arrived at our answer. What's the answer? I mean, hearing myself talk about those two paths, I think I think it makes sense to To let the nineties soar on to their next home. You know? Because, I guess, ultimately, it's letting go, but it's also reality.

Speaker6: And the reality is that she doesn't need the things.

Speaker7: The love stays. You know? If I want to remember her. That's within myself, and it I don't really need a physical crutch for that.

Speaker1: I think that's beautiful. Like, You're not going to use a crutch to remember. You're just going to trust that you will. Yeah. So, Ariana Yes? Does that mean that you will take off the huge ring That you wear all the time even though it gets in the way?

Speaker6: No. You can't make me.

Speaker1: I see. So you have not absorbed the lesson of your own story that you reported.

Speaker6: Okay. Well, I will share one thing, which is that a few years ago, I was making, of all things, a pinata for my friend's birthday. And, yeah, I, like, took the ring off to do it. I put it on the ground, and I stepped on it. And it, like, mushed down into this, like, unwearable shape. No. And I, like, picked it up, and I was horrified. And my friend generously, like, went to work on it, and she made it wearable again, and and I was super, super grateful. But I guess, like, after, like, talking to Molly, The thing I realized was that I think if that happens again, I'd be a little less freaked out.

Speaker1: Thanks, Ariana.

Speaker6: Of course. Talk to you soon.

Speaker1: Bye. Goodbye. Alright. Our next story is about a kind of goodbye we got a lot of messages about, the goodbye you regret. And it comes from a listener who actually hasn't listened to that many episodes.

Speaker4: It's about

Speaker10: three to four. Sorry. Because I find that it's really involved. It cannot do things in, you know, with the background. You go, okay. Listen to Invisibility. Mhmm. You have to really concentrate.

Speaker1: This is my mom, the queen who kills with candor. She's also a hot girl who always has the latest on what's new in skin care. Wow. You look so moisturized. Or is that sweat?

Speaker10: No. No. No. No. Oh, this is my little. It's a sunscreen. I love it.

Speaker1: I wanted to talk to my mom because She's had a lot of practice saying goodbye, specifically to her mom, my grandma. My mom grew up an only child in Taiwan, and my grandpa died early on. So from a young age, it was just her and Waipua, the two of them, Which they took advantage of with their own special rituals. Like, when my mom was a kid, Waipa liked to dress her up like a doll, buy fabric in the morning and sit at the sewing machine for hours to make my mom a dress by the afternoon.

Speaker10: We don't really have a routine. Teen, you know, like, oh, daddy's coming home, so we need

Speaker16: to make dinner for everyone. So she

Speaker10: was just concentrating on making it To finishing from start to finish.

Speaker1: Well, her routine would be you.

Speaker10: Yeah. Let's try.

Speaker1: But then when my mom was twenty two, she broke up this duo. She flew to the US to go to grad school and live with my dad who she'd been doing long distance with. My mom says back then, if you were lucky enough to skip town for the US, leaving wasn't a question mark. Everyone was on board at the time. But still, I'd always wondered what had gone down in that goodbye. We never talked about the actual moment of it.

Speaker10: That for me is really, really, really scary. A scary thought.

Speaker1: In the weeks leading up to the flight, my mom says everything was a scramble. Waipua was in supreme Waipua mode, taking my mom to get her hair curled to look like a movie star, going to acupuncture to jab needles in my mom's face for a sinus problem. There was no time to talk or think much about the separation, how she'd be leaving Waipua to live all by herself, not even the day of the flight.

Speaker10: Yeah. Then we were, you know, in the taxi And, you know, kind of tense moment because I you know, we were both silent. A lot of things are, you know, going through our minds.

Speaker1: Were you thinking about at all?

Speaker10: As a young people at that time, I'm not as thoughtful as I would now. So I was more thinking of my own problem. But, of course, Thinking, oh, she's living, you know, by herself.

Speaker1: When they got to the airport, my mom was hoping for another shot at goodbye, but other family had now arrived. My mom felt like she had to make small talk. And before she realized it was time to line up at the gate, how did you actually end up literally saying goodbye?

Speaker10: Oh, definitely hug and shed some tears, of course. Cannot really go deeper.

Speaker1: In other words, she felt like she blew it. Over the next four decades, my mom had to leave and say goodbye to Waipua probably twenty five times on visits back to Taiwan or when visited us in Houston. Growing up, I'm sure I witnessed many of these goodbyes, But they don't stick out in my mind. But now as an adult, I feel for her, having to do this really hard thing over and over again. Like, she's stuck in some kind of goodbye Groundhog Day. Did you ever figure out a way to make it less painful?

Speaker10: I I was just basically, using avoidance strategy. Just not to think about it Love to think about it.

Speaker1: Right.

Speaker10: The more you dwell on it, the more you become more deep depressed.

Speaker1: Mhmm. Mhmm. Good old fashioned avoidance.

Speaker10: Right. Good old fashioned.

Speaker1: Then the final goodbye, the big one. In twenty twenty, Waipol lost her appetite and her blood pressure was off. Her nurse at the nursing home took her to the hospital. What was supposed to be a day of observation turned into days, then a week, then an oxygen tank. My mom got on the first flight she could, but she had to quarantine for two weeks when she landed. She was just a few days from making it to the hospital when the time game, so they did a video call.

Speaker10: When she was, in her oxygen tank, she was looking at these so I can, you know, have a eye cocut with her. Of course. The only thing I think is just she must feel, lonely. If I'm there, you know, definitely will help help her.

Speaker1: My mom had so much practice with goodbyes. I thought she'd have something to tell me about how to do them well, some useful advice, But she didn't really have any. She told me that saying goodbye always hurt, and she never learned how to do it right with Waipa, Not during those forty five years, and not that last time either. If you could do it over and you could have made it by her side, what would you have said to her or done?

Speaker10: I will kiss her, of course. Pat her on her head like like a baby.

Speaker1: But then I had this memory with Waipua that I thought might help my mom feel better about these botched goodbyes. So, mom, there's this moment I witnessed a while ago that I never talked to you about. Decades ago, when my mom and dad were long distance, my mom made a cassette tape of herself singing for my dad, and she made an extra copy for Waipou. And a few years ago, when our family was in Taipei visiting, my grandma got out the tape and played it for me.

Speaker10: Oh, yeah. Thank you. Hello?

Speaker1: My mom is singing you and me, a song originally composed around the thirteenth century in China. And as we were sitting there listening to this tape, I noticed Wipaa's lips were moving to all the words. Like, she'd listened to this song over and over again. I memorized every lyric. When I told my mom about this moment, it was like she'd been flattened by an emotional dump truck.

Speaker10: Wow. So she must be listening, like, a lot. Wow.

Speaker1: Did you know that she listened to those songs?

Speaker10: I didn't know. I didn't know.

Speaker1: How does that make you feel?

Speaker10: Well yeah. I mean, of course. By listening to my voice, my singing, she must feel closer to me.

Speaker1: You know, when we talk about goodbyes, I feel like people tend to focus on what happens during the literal parting of ways, you know, like that airport scene.

Speaker10: Right.

Speaker1: The hug, the kiss, the wave. But My. This moment with Waipua, it, like, made me realize that that's just one goodbye point In, like, the long arc of goodbyes.

Speaker10: Right.

Speaker4: And that

Speaker1: there are all these other goodbyes that are largely invisible to the other person.

Speaker10: Mhmm.

Speaker1: Like, this goodbye that Waipua was doing with you Right. By listening to your songs In holding you close all these years.

Speaker10: Right. I think that also

Speaker1: There's one other thing my mom would have done if she'd gotten to say goodbye in person. She said she'd play YouTube. YouTube of Wipla's favorite song, small town story by this famous Taiwanese singer, Teresa Tang. But Surely, my mom, who my dad calls, little bird, can do better than YouTube. So I asked her to do her own invisible unofficial goodbye. Sing another song for Waipua.

Speaker4: Thank you for dressing up for the the occasion. So beautiful.

Speaker10: You're always too nice. Okay. That's it.

Speaker1: After the break, lead reporter and producer Abby Wendell brings some Tupperware to the goodbye party.

Speaker15: Hi. I'm Ramtin Arablouei from NPR's THROUGHLINE podcast. NPR doesn't just cover the news. We bring people together. We're proud that NPR is consistently ranked among America's most trusted news outlets, and we also put our trust in you. Please help keep this free public service strong by giving today at m p r dot org slash donate.

Speaker14: This message comes from Happier. Join Gretchen Rubin, the number one best selling author of The Happiness Project for practical advice on how to be happier, healthier, more productive, and more creative. Listen to Happier with Gretchen Rubin wherever you get your podcasts. This message comes from the empty grave of Comrade Bishop, a new podcast about a mystery forty years in the making. The Washington Post investigates what happened to the remains of Granada's revolutionary leader, the empty grave of comrade Bishop is out now wherever you listen.

Speaker13: This message comes from movement. Migration is one of the most divisive political issues. But on the podcast Movement, host Maclete Haddaro approaches it with a different lens. Music. Find movement with Maclete Haddaro wherever you listen.

Speaker1: Hey. It's Laurie Yserraga from Code Switch, the race and identity podcast From NPR. I'm one of thousands of NPR network voices at more than two hundred local newsrooms across the country, working to bring people together through our free and independent journalism, music, and so much more. The NPR network. What you hear changes everything. Learn more at m p r dot org slash network.

Speaker8: You ever been there when an uncomfortable question about race comes up, but you don't know how to answer? That's where Code Switch lives. Each week, we're talking about race and how it intersects with every other aspect of your life, especially when it's uncomfortable. Listen now to the code switch podcast from NPR.

Speaker1: Alright. We have reached our final goodbye of the episode

Speaker4: sound like we're at our own funeral.

Speaker1: It kind of is a funeral for our show. Yeah. Hello, Abby Wendell. Hello, Yoashoff.

Speaker4: So, like, as you know, I'm from the Midwest.

Speaker10: Mhmm.

Speaker4: And we have a bit of a reputation about our goodbyes. Are you familiar?

Speaker1: Okay. I'm not actually familiar. I did see an email from a listener who said something about Midwestern goodbyes being famous For being really long and drawn out and, like, you can't really get out of them. Yes. Is that right?

Speaker4: That is absolutely correct. It is Prolonged. It it likes to linger. It's broken down into steps Sometimes there's a sort of, like, welp and a knee slap and kind of, like, maybe a stretch to indicate that you might be getting up off the couch.

Speaker1: Oh, that's the signal to initiate.

Speaker4: Yeah. Okay. But then, like, the goodbye can last anywhere from Thirty minutes to Thirty minutes. Like hours. No. There's going to be some sort of Obligatory taking of leftovers. I I saw one person call this ensnarement cake, which I thought was hilarious. Ensnarement cake. Yeah. I love that. Also, there's, like, a stage where you're at the foyer making plans for the future. Mhmm. The Internet, not surprisingly, is filled with scorn for the Midwestern goodbye. I've seen jokes about like, if you go to dinner together, you can expect For the goodbyes that take place in the parking lot to last as long, if not longer, than the actual dinner.

Speaker1: Oh my god. That sounds like torture to me. And also, I don't know if you're aware of this, Abby Wendell, but there's a joke about you Oh, no. On our team Oh, no. Just about how it is impossible to get out of meetings

Speaker10: with you.

Speaker6: Oh, god.

Speaker4: So as a Midwesterner, I've engaged with this goodbye, obviously. You've been victim to it, apparently. Yeah. You know, kind of by default Mhmm. Until this moment. Right? Like, this moment made me question it. Like, does it actually have a value? Is there anything redeeming about it? And is it the right kind of goodbye For this particular moment so I called up the guy that I like to think about these kinds of questions with, David, of course.

Speaker17: I'm kind of like, a story psychotherapist, which feels more like what I I feel like I do because I'm not Doing therapy for people. Right? It's, like, much more about, like, somebody needs to put their story on the couch, and we, like, listen.

Speaker4: Typically not. But yeah.

Speaker17: It's not that it's never happened.

Speaker4: Uh-huh. I feel like that's a great descriptor, like a story psychotherapist with, like, a splash Of rabbi?

Speaker17: Yes. Yes. There's definitely a certain amount of, rabbinic knowledge that's required for this job.

Speaker4: So for our listeners, this is David Goodhertz. Mhmm. He helps us do, like, intellectual reporting and

Speaker2: Mhmm.

Speaker4: And research for our stories.

Speaker1: He does so much. Yeah.

Speaker4: And he felt, like, doubly qualified to talk about this particular question because he recently moved to the Midwest, Ohio, actually. He's like an hour and a half north of me. And he reports already experiencing some Midwestern goodbye energy.

Speaker17: I found a lime in my car today. That was not one that I bought. That was like someone was like I had mentioned something that someone was like, oh, you'll need limes for that. You know? And then it just sits in my car for the next month.

Speaker4: It's an ensnarement lime. Yeah. So I asked David to do a little bit of research and thinking about the Midwestern goodbye. Some, like, mulling it over. Mhmm. And here's what he had to say.

Speaker17: I think people who come from the outside and look at it I think one of the reasons people hate it is because it looks so denialist.

Speaker6: Denialist. You

Speaker17: know, it's just like, just say goodbye and be done with it. You know? But I think that the it's a very particular way. It's all about leftovers. It really is all about leftovers. It's you're gathering up the leftovers of the night from each conversation, from each person, something you haven't yet eaten, you know, from each person there in order to say, like, well, but I'm still carrying these leftovers home with me, so I haven't fully disappear the the some bit of this is still with me.

Speaker1: I'm I'm thinking about my mom and All the people out there who have these goodbyes in their life that they regret not doing, you know, things they wish they had done or said in a goodbye.

Speaker10: Mhmm.

Speaker1: And it feels like the Midwestern goodbye, this kind of, like, extra space and room built into, apparently, every farewell, I mean, it's just like a catchall To prevent against that. Feeling.

Speaker4: So I I talked with one listener, and she said that the Midwestern goodbye is a goodbye that's open to opportunity. Unity. I think that that is the value of the Midwestern goodbye. It it's not maybe the only goodbye that you should have in your arsenal, But, like, it is a goodbye that has a time and a place for moments where there's a lot of uncertainty, Where maybe, like, you don't want to go, and maybe you you don't actually have to go. Like, anything could happen in that lingering.

Speaker1: Are you suggesting that we camp out at NPR headquarters and just get a bunch of Tupperware.

Speaker4: We need to start baking casseroles now.

Speaker1: Yo. Okay. That's the plan.

Speaker4: Okay. Got it. But, As you know, that's actually not the situation we're in. Yeah. And at some point, while I was talking with David, he told me about this, like, very different kind of goodbye that might be more fitting.

Speaker17: Just to get into my rabbi mode For a second. This is, like, so Jewish. I, like, can't even believe that this exists, actually, but there's, like, a way to say goodbye to a book that you really love reading.

Speaker10: Mhmm.

Speaker17: That is like that that that has that is that you've gotten a lot of lessons from. I feel like a a track date of the Talmud. It's called, the Hadran, which means, the we will return, which is a a prayer that you say. You know, the thought here is you're reading a book is is always a way of engaging with the community in in this tradition that the sense is community is built out of That shared argumentation around a set of ideas and and visions, that really matter To to you or to the other people who would come with you to read this tractate. And, I mean and that was, like, one of the things that when I got to invisibility, it was one of the first things I was like, oh, that's what's happening here. We're, like, putting a Tractate on the table, and we're all talmudically dissecting it until there's nothing, you you know, left to say about it, and then we're gonna come back and do it tomorrow. You know? And so and so there's this prayer As you say, we will return to you, and you will return to us. Our mind is on you, and your mind is on us.

Speaker10: We

Speaker17: will not forget you, and you will not forget us. Not in this world And not in the world to come. And the idea is you're supposed to say it aloud, You know, at the end of a of of a study session, and it's also you're also supposed to leave a little bit unread, so that you can come back to it and it can come back to you. But to me, there's something about that formula That it's saying, like, I won't forget you. Right? I'm gonna come back to you, and I'm and you won't forget me, But also, like, I'm really leaving.

Speaker4: So when David and I began, like, thinking together about Talmudicly dissecting this goodbye, which I've been calling the Talmudic goodbye. It really helped me realize that, like, it has something that the Midwestern goodbye for all its beautiful virtues, like, just doesn't actually have.

Speaker17: There isn't a moment where you really say, you know what? Like, We gotta let it burn. We gotta let it burn, and we have to and we really have to to to not not end the denial necessarily, but, like, take a moment to, mark something that is this burning, that is this kind of, like, cleansing. That to me is something that feels It's missing something of that element. Yeah. Like, to me, I can only experience the finality as, like, a who knows.

Speaker4: Right. Right.

Speaker17: But not as a shared finality.

Speaker4: A who knows is a denial of no. We know.

Speaker17: Yeah. Yeah.

Speaker4: We're we're things are ending, And we're saying goodbye now.

Speaker17: Oh, when you said that, suddenly, I just felt very, very sad.

Speaker10: Yeah.

Speaker1: Oh, You're gonna make me cry. I know. Yeah. It's really sad. It's really sad.

Speaker6: Yeah.

Speaker12: I mean,

Speaker1: There is something kind of like, there's like a clinger on energy to the Midwestern goodbye that I find very sweet. Yeah. And, like, not pathetic, but, like, has shades of In denial

Speaker10: Yeah.

Speaker1: I'm not letting you go. Right. We'll meet again.

Speaker10: Yeah.

Speaker1: And Sometimes what you need for a goodbye is just, you know, a dramatic ritual of just Sort of like ripping the bit like, something cathartic rather than the don't go, don't go,

Speaker4: Which, if you'll recall, invisibilia used to do.

Speaker1: I knew you were gonna go here. Yes. That is true. How could I forget?

Speaker4: Well, how could I not

Speaker1: go here?

Speaker4: So, yeah, at the end of every season, we would Gather together and have what we called a coven party.

Speaker1: Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. Because we, like, would always burn something.

Speaker4: Sticky notes of to do lists, interview transcripts.

Speaker10: There was a certain amount of debauchery. I mean

Speaker1: Oh, yeah. All of us, like, lounged in our chairs, cigarettes out, drinks, double fisting. Remember when we had a competition, the drinks of many colors?

Speaker2: Yes. We

Speaker10: had

Speaker4: What do you think? Should we plan a coven party? Absolutely. Where should it be?

Speaker1: I feel like I'm in the middle. So and I have a solo stove, like, Thai food menu. Like, yeah, Thai food, there's there's a good Thai place around us. We need to decide on what the ritual of, like, what we're burning.

Speaker6: Yes.

Speaker1: I think something Zoom related would be fun.

Speaker4: Yowei, you'll notice I've now engaged us in a proper Midwestern goodbye because I we are making plans

Speaker10: for the future.

Speaker1: Oh, I've been ensnared. I'm a sitting duck for the Midwestern. I mean, listen. You've been ensnaring me this

Speaker4: Seven years. Seven years

Speaker1: with all the Midwestern goodbyes during meetings. So, of course, I would be ensnared once again. That's it for the goodbye show. Thank you to everyone who wrote in with your goodbye stories and messages of support, including Natasha Allen, Ryan Calan, La la Drona, Jessica Van Dyne, Marina Fu, Claire Jones, Allison Laughlin, Marissa Mann, Eric Ong, Alisa Cole Sicar, Lauren Torres, Jeffrey Meyer, Isaiah Prasad, Christian Cobian, and Kelsey Simpkins loved getting to go through all your emails, and they helped us in this moment. A tear or two might have been shed. Special thanks to Alexandra Dixon, to Wyndham Juno for Reflecting on the Midwestern goodbye with Abby and to Daisy Wu for helping ID a song for my mom's cassette tape. This episode was produced by the three a's, Abby Wendel

Speaker2: Andrew Mambo.

Speaker1: Ariana Garibaldi, and me, Yo Wei Shah. It was edited by Liza Jaeger. Invisibilia is

Speaker6: also produced by supervising editor Nina Patuk, supervising producer Liana

Speaker2: executive producer Irene Noguchi

Speaker1: and my cohost Kia Myakkonateese. This episode was mastered by Josh Newell. Our technical Director is Andy Huether.

Speaker2: Legal and standard support from Micah Ratner and Tony Cavan.

Speaker6: And our senior vice president of programming is Anya ten.

Speaker2: Theme music by Infinity Knives.

Speaker6: Additional music in this episode provided by Elizabeth Dillece, Connor Lafitte, and Running Dog Music.

Speaker1: Alright. We have come to the moment to actually say goodbye and not just keep running down the driveway waving at you. Goodbye, and thank you to everyone across NPR who helped us make invisibilia and share it with the world. Visuals, marketing, rad, engineering, IT, social, audience engagement, legal, and so many more teams. And, of course, Thank you and all the flowers to Elise Spiegel, Lulu Miller, and Anne Gudenkauf for creating this weird, beautiful show, And to former host, Handa Rosen, and to all the invisibilians past and present who made it go with all your contributions. Abby Wendell.

Speaker11: Adelina Lancionese. Alex Dudson.

Speaker10: Alex Chung.

Speaker11: Alice Yeh. Alicia Chan. Elise Spiegel. Andy Huether.

Speaker2: Andrew Mambo.

Speaker6: Andrew Mambo. Anne Gudenkopf, Anya Grundmann, Ariana Garab Lee, BA Parker, Barry Hardiman,

Speaker2: Brendan Baker, Brent

Speaker6: Bachman, Kara Cello,

Speaker3: Carolyn McCusker.

Speaker2: Chris Bendarev.

Speaker11: Clare Marie Schneider.

Speaker17: David Goodhertz. Deborah George.

Speaker18: Eric Newsom. Hannah Rosen. Irene Noguchi.

Speaker10: James Kim. Jeff Rogers. Joe Nixon.

Speaker11: Julie Carly. Justine Yan. Karen Duffin.

Speaker1: Kat

Speaker11: Chow. Kia Miyaka Natisse. Jake Arlo.

Speaker1: Lauren Beard.

Speaker2: Lee Hale.

Speaker6: Lina Sanzkiri. Liana Simstrom. Liza Jaeger. Lulu Miller.

Speaker2: Luis Streges. Matt Martinez.

Speaker6: Maria Paz Gutierrez.

Speaker2: Mark Bennett.

Speaker6: Megan Kane. Mikaela. Rodriguez.

Speaker10: Micah Ratner. Mickie Kapper.

Speaker2: Neil Carruth.

Speaker1: Nina Patak. Nicole Beemsterboer.

Speaker10: Nick m Ness. Oliver Wang.

Speaker4: Noor Waswas.

Speaker10: Pablo. Phoebe

Speaker1: Wang. Pranav Bosker. Rachel Carbonara.

Speaker12: Rebecca Ramirez.

Speaker6: Raina Cohen. Sarah Long. Shirley Henry.

Speaker10: Taylor Haney. Theo Greenlee. Travis Larjuk.

Speaker1: And me, Yo Wei Shah. And last but certainly not least, thank you to every single one of you for listening over the years, contributing your stories, questions, corrections, and ideas, for badgering your friends and family to listen to our episodes, for just hanging with us. If you wanna keep hanging, you can always revisit the archive on NPR's site and wherever you get your podcasts, we're not sure what happens next for this feed, but you should stay subscribed for now. Who knows? Maybe magic will strike. And some of our team is staying on at NPR to keep telling beautiful audio stories, and we'll share them with you. As for me, I just started a newsletter, and you can find me on Twitter, Instagram, all the things. Just search Yo Wei Shah. You will find me. We will put everybody's info on our website so you can follow us to see what we make next. Okay. We are actually at the end now. See you soon somewhere out there.

Speaker14: Support for NPR and the following message come from the Kauffman Foundation, providing access to opportunities that help people achieve financial stability, upward mobility, and economic prosperity regardless of race, gender, or geography. Kaufman dot org.

Speaker18: Support for NPR and the following message come from the Walton Family Foundation working to solve social and environmental problems to improve lives today and benefit future generations. More information at walton family foundation dot org.

Speaker5: Hey. It's Britney Loos from NPR's It's Been a Minute podcast. I'm one of thousands of NPR network voices coming to you from over two hundred local newsrooms across the country. We bring all Americans closer together through free and independent journalism, music, politics, culture, and so much more. The NPR network. What you hear Changes everything. Learn more at n p r dot org slash network.